'Marketing'
How to create a marketing plan
Before you begin launching digital marketing strategies, you need to create an overall marketing plan for your business. This plan will guide your various strategies and help you achieve your most important marketing objectives.


Here are eight marketing strategy steps to creating an effective plan.

1. Define your brand
First, make sure you have a clear idea of your branding. Consult your brand guidelines or create guidelines if you haven’t yet developed any. Consider your brand voice, brand values, and unique selling points — the characteristics that set your business apart and convince customers to choose you over other options.


For example, an organic cleaning products company might make its products’ environmental friendliness the focus of its branding. A financial services company might highlight its experience and its transparent approach to working with customers. Your branding will help guide you when creating your marketing strategies for various channels.


Establishing your brand voice ensures you’re delivering a consistent message across all channels.

2. Build buyer personas
Another essential step is creating buyer personas — representations of the various kinds of people that make up your target audience. These personas are fictional but based on data about your real customers or website visitors. When creating your buyer personas, list as many relevant traits as possible, such as:

Age
Job title
Location
Interests
Goals
When creating your marketing strategies, keep these personas in mind. They are who you’re trying to reach with your marketing efforts.

3. Create SMART goals
You’ll also need to set goals for your marketing plan. These objectives will keep you on track when creating your marketing strategies. Set overall goals and then break them down into smaller ones that will help you achieve them.


To make your goals more effective, set SMART goals. SMART goals are:

Specific: Create detailed goals and avoid vagueness. For example, a goal to “increase leads generated by 20%” is better than just “increase leads generated.”
Measurable: Set up a process for measuring your progress toward your goals.
Attainable: Set ambitious goals but make sure that attaining them is realistic.
Relevant: Your marketing goals should be relevant to your overall business objectives.
Time-bound: Set a time limit on achieving your goals to keep you on track.
4. Set your marketing budget
It’s important to define and allocate your marketing budget to avoid overspending and ensure you make the most of your resources. Research digital marketing pricing, marketing budget examples, and typical budgets for your industry to help you decide on your budget.

Your goals will also be a deciding factor in how you allocate your spending since you’ll likely want to dedicate more resources to your most important goals.

5. Choose your digital marketing channels
Next, choose the digital marketing channels and strategies that will best match your brand, help you reach your target audience, and help you achieve your goals. You have numerous options when it comes to Internet marketing strategies. We’ll discuss many of these types of marketing strategy with examples in the next section.


For help choosing the right strategies for your business, consult with a professional Internet marketing strategist.

6. Plan your strategies
Next, you can begin planning your strategies for each channel, as well as how your various strategies will work together to achieve your overall objectives. The planning process varies based on the channels you’re using. Social media marketing, for instance, involves choosing which platforms to use, deciding on the kind of content you want to post, and creating a content calendar.


Pay-per-click (PPC) advertising involves deciding on the ad platforms you want to use, the types of ads you want to run, and creating targeting and bidding strategies. All plans should include a process for tracking and measuring your results. You’ll learn more about various strategies in the section below.

7. Launch your campaigns
Once you’ve completed the above marketing strategy steps, you can launch your campaigns! Be sure to follow the plans you created and carefully track the steps you complete, along with their results.

8. Track your results
As your campaigns run, monitor your results closely. As you gather data about campaign performance, you may uncover potential improvements. Feel free to refine your strategies as you go based on what you’ve learned.


You can also run A/B tests to gather more information about which approaches work best for your business.

Good agencies have more than 50 testimonials.

Great agencies have more than 100 testimonials.

WebFX has over 1,100+ glowing client testimonials.
See What Makes Us Stand out arrow right
cta8 img
11 marketing strategies with examples
So, which marketing strategies should you include in your plan? Below, we’ll discuss 11 top digital marketing strategies with examples of how they work to help you decide. For additional assistance in choosing the right marketing strategies, request a free quote or call us at 888-256-9448 to speak with a strategist.

1. Search engine optimization (SEO)
Search engine optimization, commonly called SEO, is one of the best strategies for growing your business online. What is SEO? It’s a digital marketing strategy that helps your website show up on search engine results pages (SERPs) for relevant search queries, which drives more qualified traffic to your site.


It encompasses a wide range of tactics, from including keywords in your content to earning links from other websites to improving your page speed. SEO is an important business strategy because of the popularity of search engines and the competitive nature of SERPs. Organic search — the unpaid listings in search results — drive more than half of all website traffic, and about 75% of search engine users don’t go past the first page of results.


So, landing on the first page of search results for an important keyword can lead to a significant boost in traffic to your website. Creating an SEO strategy involves steps such as:

Performing an SEO audit of your website to determine which areas require improvement
Analyzing your competitors’ SEO performance to inform your strategy
Conducting keyword research to determine which keywords to target
Researching opportunities for link building
For an example of a successful SEO strategy, let’s take a look at KOA, a network of public campgrounds with locations across the country. KOA turned to WebFX to help them create a custom SEO strategy that would boost their market development strategy‘s effectiveness by driving more traffic to their website and reaching qualified leads. As a result of their campaign, KOA improved its keyword rankings and saw a 150% increase in organic traffic and a 198% increase in organic transactions.


2. Content marketing
Content marketing is a marketing strategy that involves creating content to attract potential customers to your business and meet your marketing and business goals. This content come in many forms, including:

Blog posts
Articles
Infographics
Videos
Podcasts
Webinars
Ebooks
In your content, you cover topics related to your business or industry and relevant to your target audience. The goal is to provide users with value, while establishing yourself as an authority in your field. Content marketing will also help your target audience get familiar with your brand and move leads closer to becoming customers.


Most of your content will be freely available online to attract potential customers. You might require information such as email addresses to access some long-form content in order to convert prospects into leads. For an example of effective content marketing, check out the ‘grow’ blog from Acorns, a financial services company that focuses on micro-investing and robo-investing.


Acorns partnered with business news organization CNBC to create high-quality content for its blog, which offers practical financial advice. The blog is well-designed, gives readers useful information, and introduces users to what Acorns offers.Acorns grow blog content marketing examplePartnering with a leading news organization is not a requirement for using content marketing, but working with professional content creators can be beneficial.


Whether you’re creating your own content or working with a content marketing pro, Acorns’ blog is an excellent source of inspiration.


3. Pay-per-click (PPC) advertising
Pay-per-click (PPC) advertising is a method of placing ads online in which advertisers pay for each click their ad receives. The two main types of PPC ads are search ads, which appear on SERPs, and display ads, which show on other websites. Search ads are the most common type.


To place these ads, you bid on keywords. Your ads can then appear above the organic search results when someone searches those keywords.PPC search ads for dog collarsCreating a PPC advertising strategy involves:

Setting up your ad account
Choosing your advertising platform(s)
Conducting keyword research to determine which keywords to bid on
Setting your budget and choosing your bidding strategy
Creating, testing, and refining your ads and landing pages
PPC advertising is an excellent strategy for getting results quickly and creating ads for events such as holidays or sales. You can learn more about the effectiveness of this marketing strategy with examples. Let’s take a look at Furbo, which makes interactive dog cameras that owners can use to see, talk to, and give treats to their dogs remotely.


The company took advantage of the benefits of PPC advertising when they partnered with us on a campaign for Black Friday and Cyber Monday. For the campaign, we created a Smart Shopping campaign on Google Ads and used the Maximize Conversion Value bid strategy. The ads ran on Google Ads’ Search, Display, YouTube, and Gmail ad networks.


The campaign resulted in a 348% increase in conversion volume, a 76% increase in return on ad spend (ROAS), and a 54% decrease in cost per acquisition (CPA).


4. Email marketing
Email marketing involves using email to build relationships with leads and convert them into customers. When done right, email can have a return on investment (ROI) of as much as 4400%. To create an email campaign, you’ll need to choose an email marketing platform.


These platforms allow you to:

Manage your subscriber lists
Draft emails
Segment your audience to enable increased personalization
Test your emails
Automate your campaigns
To build your email list, add opt-in forms to your website as pop-ups or in footers, sidebars, and elsewhere on your site. Offer incentives to users who sign up for your email list, such as access to exclusive content or a coupon code. One benefit of email marketing is that subscribers opted into hearing from you, so they’re likely highly qualified leads.


Once leads are part of your email list, you can send them personalized content that encourages them to become customers — this is known as lead nurturing. Drizly, which lets users order beer, wine, and spirits online for delivery from local stores, provides a great example of effective email marketing. To encourage users to sign up for their email list, Drizly offers a $5 discount.


Drizly email popup exampleIn the emails, subscribers are treated to the same humor and tone as the brand uses on its website. The brand’s emails relate to current events, such as holidays, and sometimes include special offers. The emails even reference the weather in the subscriber’s area and encourage them to order from Drizly rather than going out in the rain.


Personalized email example from Drizly


5. Social media marketing
About seven in 10 Americans use social media, and 77% of social media users buy from brands that they follow. If your company isn’t using social media yet, now is a great time to start! Social media marketing involves growing your business by using social networking sites such as:

Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
LinkedIn
Pinterest
You can use these sites to build relationships with potential customers, answer customer questions, and bring new leads to your website. To create a social media strategy, you need to:

Decide which platforms you want to use
Determine the kinds of content you want to post
Choose the tone you want to use and the personality you want to convey
Decide when you want to post and create a content calendar
Track and analyze your results
As with creating your overall marketing plan, your brand, audience, and goals will help you develop an effective strategy. For instance, you need to know which social media sites your audience uses when choosing platforms to market your business. For an example of an innovative and inspiring social media campaign, let’s turn to personal care products company Dove.


In 2019, the brand launched Project #ShowUs and worked with women and non-binary individuals to create a library of more than 10,000 photographs that “offer a more inclusive vision of beauty.” The photos show women and non-binary individuals from a variety of backgrounds participating in various activities and challenging stereotypes about beauty.Dove #showus campaign on websiteDove shared the photos across Instagram, YouTube, and other channels and encouraged users to submit their photos. The company also encouraged media and advertising companies to use the photos in their content.


The campaign encouraged participation from Dove’s audience, stood out due to its innovative nature, and fit perfectly with Dove’s brand.